Peter, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
Awesome to have you here.
Hi Michael, and my fellow Python developers.
Yeah, it's real good to have you here.
I know that there was a lot of excitement about Flett.
In fact, I got a message just a couple of weeks ago from somebody saying,
"Is Flett what you used to write your mobile apps?"
And I'm like, "No, because that was a while ago."
And I kind of wish that was an option, but it wasn't an option for us at the time.
Anyway, I think Flutter is going strong.
I think there's a lot of excitement around it.
And certainly, there's an excitement for building mobile applications in Python.
Sure, yeah.
It's, yeah, Flutter is getting stronger and stronger.
You know, like recently I saw there was an attempt to fork Flutter, you know?
Because like there was a feeling in the community that it's not moving anywhere, you know?
But I don't believe that.
Even that guy mentioned that there are like 50 developers working on Flutter right now at Google.
So yeah, Flutter is getting better and better and their release cycle is pretty awesome, you know?
Yeah.
It's really hard to catch up.
I know.
That can actually be a problem.
I just updated Flutter on my Mac Mini.
And I had out of date CocoaPods and Ruby.
And there's a whole tool chain that people need to know about.
Maybe we can talk a little bit about the tool chain.
But yeah, you're constantly chasing versions and releases and updates.
And then you've got Android Studio versions.
You've got Xcode.
There's a lot there.
Yeah.
You know, we recently started using Flutter version manager, FEM.
And it's pretty good.
Yeah, because they're updating so fast, you know?
It's really hard to catch up.
Yeah, it sure is.
All right.
We'll talk about that in just a second.
But maybe a quick introduction.
It has been.
I guess it's worth giving a shout out back in summer 2022.
You were on the show when Flutter first came out to tell everyone about Flutter and how it's
basically Flutter plus Python for UI.
But it's been a while.
So tell people quickly who you are and we can get into the project.
Sure.
My name is Theodore Fitzner and I'm the founder and developer of Flutter framework.
Like Flutter for Python for Flutter.
Flutter and Flutter.
Yeah, it's been two and a half years since we released the first version.
It's not like the first version, but the first release of web.
And since that time we gained really great traction.
to my mind, we got 12,000 stars on GitHub, 70 contributors, 5K members on Discord channel.
I found the statistics for pypy Pi.
It's like almost 3 million downloads from pypy or from web package.
So it's pretty great.
It's a great community, great people, a lot of feedback, a lot of issues.
So it's pretty nice.
So yeah.
Yeah, that's awesome.
And it definitely seems like it's going strong.
I do think maybe it's worth actually talking a bit about what Flutter is before we dive into Python for Flutter with Flutter, right?
Mm-hmm.
Give people a quick sense of what is this Flutter thing that we're talking about.
Sure.
Yeah.
So Flutter is a cross-platform framework.
It works for web, iOS, Android, and all desktop platforms.
It allows you to write nice apps, really nice apps with great UI in doc language.
So you have to learn a new language.
And Flutter is a framework.
So it's like, it's not just UI, it's application framework.
It has all the things to build the app and publish it.
Yeah, there's the language, which is Dart, not Flutter.
But then Flutter has all the UI widgets and the mechanisms.
But it also is a whole series of build tools that will take that and create things that you can upload to the mobile app stores, like Apple's App Store, or Google Play, or other places, right?
Like desktop apps.
Yeah.
So there's a bunch of layers to what Flutter really is, I think.
And also the interesting part about Flutter is that it has like a painted UI.
So it started from the Sphere Engine and now they have their own engine impeller.
So the UI is basically painted on the canvas.
So it looks similar everywhere on every device.
Like some frameworks, like for example, React Native, they use native controls.
Like in loop.
Like, but Flutter, it looks similar on every device.
So this is the nice thing.
The thing that's nice, you know, it's cool that it runs everywhere, but sometimes that can fall short.
The biggest example of this for me is Java applications.
When they have their own file browsing dialogue, you're like, oh, this is not, this is clearly not a native sort of thing going on here.
You know, on a desktop situation.
They don't look like Windows dialogues.
They don't look like macOS dialogues.
They just look like Java dialogues.
But, so that can be a problem or limitation.
But Flutter tries to look like the native controls.
Right?
And there's, there's the, what do they call them?
The Cupertino widgets and the material design widgets that, so it tries to adapt to the platforms it's on.
Yeah.
This one is called adaptive.
So yeah, it's, it's like this material design is built in.
There is Cupertino controls.
Also, I, I thought there are,
fake body packages for micro S and, windows like, doing design.
By the way about dialogue, you know, if, like, this, it's called file picker and it,
it looks different for all platforms.
So it's not always, drawn like the UI.
Uh, you can write like a native package, like using the, the underlying, operating system API.
So the, the dialogue looks, pretty standard on macOS or windows.
So, yeah, it's not always so bad.
Yeah.
Yeah, no, it's, it's good.
It is for building apps all over the place, flutter, but I would say it's, it's real traction
seems to be in the mobile app space.
Right.
What do you think?
Primarily iOS and Android.
Yeah.
Uh, someone, someone recently, asked me about like, why, why not to react, react native.
Uh, so why you chose.
And I went to Google, like, you know, like, typing like flutter DS, react native.
And, interesting, it became more popular this year, 2024.
Uh, so we, it, what it's a little bit ahead of react native, flutter in this year.
So, wow.
Yeah.
So it's, it's, it's according to, step workflow question area, something like that.
So, so yeah, it is, it's gaining popularity and I would say yes, flutter is more, is more,
mobile fast framework despite they have, awesome support for desktop platforms or where,
um, it's still mobile first.
And, when we talked about water, we, we should probably talk first about mobile devices.
Yeah.
And, these benefits it brings to mobile development.
That's right.
Uh, yeah.
Yeah.
It's, it's pretty interesting.
I just looked on stack overflow trends.
Let's see if I can find it.
And yeah, look at that.
The flutter is quite, quite a bit higher than react native.
More, more than I expected.
Yeah.
Okay.
So I'll put a link to that in the show notes for the stack overflow trends.
Yeah.
Still.
Uh, what are the reasons behind that?
You know, it's, maybe, maybe it's, it's ecosystem maybe because it's pretty easy to
find, an extension, to find like some nice package on pub.dev, you know, maybe it's,
uh, because it looks nice on both iOS and Android and it looks similar.
Maybe, maybe because, you know, that itself, I know, people, people tend to criticize
dark, but I have some experience writing in JavaScript, TypeScript, and that I can say that
it was really nice learning dark.
And it's so it's a, it's a great language.
And honestly, I know it's unpopular, but I feel it's kind of like better, you know, than
JavaScript too.
It's just my opinion.
So once you learn it, you can do everything.
It's pretty nice.
Maybe because of that.
Yeah.
Perhaps, perhaps.
And before we move off Flutter, just real quick, I want to give a quick shout out to
Lauren, the developer I worked with.
He and I built the Talk Python courses apps in Flutter, which is why I have
more than just like reading the docs experience in it.
And it, those, those apps are going strong today.
They're really great.
Although I'm about to release a new version because you never stop releasing new versions.
Even if you think you're done, something changes behind the scenes with iOS or Android.
This time it's Android.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
Like, oh, that package that used to do this thing, it doesn't do it anymore.
Like, oh no.
Okay.
Yeah.
So that's the foundation.
That's Flutter.
Flat.
Tell us about flat.
I mean, you talked about the downloads, but like, where does it fit in this Flutter ecosystem?
So, well, it's not a flat is, is a, is a, a, a, a, a native framework.
It's not just, as you can think, it's not just a translator to, from Python to Dart.
It's not just bindings for Flutter widgets, like PyQt, PySight,
for example, but it's, it's a standalone framework that uses Flutter for, for each UI.
So flat is an application framework.
It's not just UI and it uses Flutter to build its UI.
Yeah.
I see.
So people should think of it more as an independent UI and application framework for Python, not so much as a extension of Flutter into the Python world.
Is that maybe the way to think of it?
Right.
We're still, we're still trying to go away from this, label, you know, it's, it's kind of, but it was really nice.
Like, right.
Flutter, Epson, Python, it, it, it, it works pretty good.
Like, in, in terms of, CEO, for example, but, but, but it's not true.
Like it's, it's, it's, it's, it's a framework that uses, we could, we could like, I, I, I mean, potentially we could replace it with something else like this backend, you know, with like, compose or, you know, react native, but no, it's fine.
And, it's really, it's really great.
We, we, we, we, we have our own controls and it's not always, one-to-one maybe, maybe, but it's,
it's like, maybe or flat controls, they are built out of like multiple flutter widgets.
So we combine multiple flutter widgets into controls.
Uh, yeah, because sometimes if you, if you have some flutter experience, sometimes you can notice that it's, getting really, DUI getting really,
complex or like, you know, like, like a lot of, controls like wrapped into, like, widgets right into other widgets.
Like, for example, if you want to center something, there is a center widget.
If you want to limit the size, the resize box.
So flat combines many widgets into more like controls.
And, those are properties.
So it's like, it's, it's flutter in, serve to fighting developers in by tonic way.
I would see.
Okay.
Nice.
And on your, if people want to browse these controls widgets, what do you want to call them?
There's a whole controls section in your docs.
And I'll, I'll link to the docs, but just on the left, it says controls and you go through there.
There's layout controls, navigation controls, you know, app bar type things that you might expect from
standard mobile apps.
And of course, like I sort of pointed out, you got the Cupertino versions and you've got the,
the non Cupertino material design versions.
So people can have a look at that and just get a sense for all the controls, but there are many,
how many controls do you know off the top of your head?
Oh, it's like a hundred plus, I would say.
Yeah.
And some really nice ones, right?
Like you've got a, you've got a web view, you've got maps, animations, charts, quite a bit.
Yeah.
Web view is, is not available for like for all platforms at the moment.
Uh, it's mostly for mobile and, for my players, if I'm not mistaken.
So, yeah, it's kind of like there is a platform limitation right now that, for Windows
that, that doesn't allow to have a proper web view, on Windows platform, for example.
Oh, yes.
I remember that.
That's yeah.
Yeah.
What a hassle.
But yeah, there is, you know, work going on.
Yeah.
So, you know, you were on the show before to talk about Flett and those were pretty early
days then, right?
Yeah.
To over two years ago.
A lot of you've been, you're going strong.
Like you said, you talked about the downloads and the contributors and stars and all that.
That's awesome.
So, so you, what have you all been up to?
What's where's this effort gone?
Like what, what progress have you made?
So, yeah, we started from really simple design. It was pre-built executable for every platform, mostly like for desktop platform, which is able to display all control we have.
And that executable was and is part of a wheel, flat wheel. So if you do keep install flat, you install this executable with the Python API itself.
But then we started getting more and more requests, like asking, like, how would I put all this beautiful stuff to a mobile device? Or how do I do a standalone app?
And well, the answer is we should generate executable and Python should be part of it.
Python, your program, set by the libraries you use for your program, all this stuff should be part of this executable.
So we started, it's been a lot of work to produce standalone package for desktop, for web and for mobile.
So, Flutter is a good start for that. So the question was Python itself and the third-party packages.
So, we decided that, like, okay, Python, for desktop platform, it's pretty straightforward.
You just take a regular, basically regular Python and bundle it into your executable or application bundle and that's it.
So it's pretty straightforward.
For mobile devices, there is a challenge.
And we know that multiple projects, when are working on this problem, like the most popular Kyvi and Beware,
those guys started back, started solving this problem back in 2010, maybe 2012, if I'm not mistaken.
And they did a really great job and they still doing great, you know.
So,
Yeah, I know Beware has got a lot of recent support as well through the Anaconda team, which is really great.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. Absolutely. Yeah.
So, we will get back to Beware.
Yeah, like, okay.
But, so we started from Kyvi.
I don't know, at that point, like two years ago, I thought that I saw maybe that Kyvi is more popular and I decided to explore like this way,
whether Kyvi could be used as a foundation for a plant or we can grab portions of Kyvi and make something different, you know.
And, well, it was a good, it was a good for the start, obviously.
Obviously.
And, we managed to, to use Kyvi tooling, like Python for Android, Python for iOS, and their command line and their libraries and their recipes to compile runtime, Python runtime and third party modules and use them in
So, I mean, there was, you know, there was, you know, there was, you know,
And, well, you guys ended up moving off of it, right?
Yes.
So, recipes was great and it's still a great idea, but there are, there were limitations, you know, like, like, first of all, Kyvi recipes, some of those recipes, they're pretty outdated.
So, I tried building a few recipes, so I forked Kyvi and tried building new recipes by myself and it wasn't, it wasn't easy task, you know, it's kind of, so recipes, like, it's, it's, it's basically Python code.
And, there are a lot of, you know, it's, you should know about like a lot of debugging.
So, I was, I was really struggling, trying to build new recipes and update existing recipes in, in, for Kyvi, you know.
And also the biggest, the biggest issue with the, with the Kyvi, Kyvi's approach was, so you have to build all, all the Python runtime and all the modules, like packages by yourself.
Yeah.
All the time.
Like, if the user, yeah, it's, it's kind of, it's kind of, it's kind of paid.
So, you, you should, you should have Android SDK installed and all environment variables in place, you know, like, and, I mean, it could be a real struggle to build and it's, it takes time.
Sometimes, like, if you, if you add NumPy Pandas to your app, as a dependencies, it could take like, like half an hour to build all the packages and fingers crossed, you know, like, whether it finishes, okay, you know, or you get some weird, pretty error.
Yeah.
So, it wasn't, it wasn't nice.
No, it wasn't, it wasn't nice.
I mean, it worked, this approach worked for simple things, you know, with the, where your app requires fewer Python packages.
But if it's not something trivial, it's either no recipe or outdated recipe, or you have to build your own recipe, et cetera, et cetera.
So, yeah.
And the recipe is basically saying how to build some particular library or Python itself for Android or for iOS or something.
Is that right?
Yeah.
We can, we can dig, we can dig into that.
But it's kind of basically like settings.
It's, it's a bunch of settings for compiler, for linker, and how to move resulting files, you know.
Yeah.
That, that doesn't sound that easy.
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
It's, it's C, C++.
I can, I can, I can talk about this later, you know.
Yeah, yeah.
No, it's probably, probably people get enough of an idea from it.
Is this, I know that you were using or you published serious Python.
Is this sort of your answer to that?
Yeah.
So as we, as we do open source and Kali and other projects are open source.
I, I thought maybe it's a good idea to contribute something to open source, right?
I mean, we can, we can do this as a, as a part of our application template, for example, and not dealing with this plugin, you know, but I thought maybe someone else would be interested in using Python with your Flutter app.
So serious Python is, is really low level package that allows you to embed Python engine into your Flutter application.
So, yeah, so, and the, I, I'm not sure if it's even popular, you know, but maybe someone can use it for some purposes.
Yeah.
It's, it's nice.
Do you do anything with Python build standalone?
You know, UV is started making it really easy to install Python, all the different platforms of it by leveraging Python build standalone that was previously run by Greg now by Astral.
Yes.
Or, or do you do something else?
Yeah.
Like where you build, you build.
So you're talking about this GitHub project building every version of fighting.
Yeah.
We use, we use this, this repository for desktop.
Okay.
So yeah, we use this repository for desktop as a, as a starting point and we don't want pre-built Python from that repo and we actually repackaged it.
Nice.
So for me, for mobile, now we use a different approach and I can talk about this for, for web, for web we use, Plyoday.
Right.
Yeah.
Well, let's maybe talk for a little bit about the runtime side of things and we could talk about packaging after that.
So, sure.
Flutter goes into all different places.
More than most platforms.
You can build desktop apps.
You can build note mobile apps.
mobile apps.
You can also build web apps, kind of a competitor to Angular or something like that.
Right.
And if you're going to have Python runtimes in these different locations, and that's kind of why I was asking about Python build standalone is, you know, there's all these variations of places that could be, which is quite tricky.
So the web version is, wasm WebAssembly based, right?
Yep.
Yes, right now, FlatWebEc could be deployed in two modes in two states, like client side and service side.
So if it's deployed as a server-side app, obviously the Flutter part runs in the browser and Python runs in the server and it's standard Python with any module, you can use anything.
And client side talks to server by WebSockets.
So all UI changes are streamed via WebSockets to a client and all events go back to server-side.
So this is one mode, it's called server-side, and another mode is client-side or static web-side.
You can build, you can publish FlatApp as a static website and put it on Cloudflare or GitHub pages or whatever you like.
Nice.
Yeah, you put the WebAssembly files there and it just picks it up and goes, right?
Yeah, it's Flutter itself and Python, FireDyne, which is WebAssembly, which is Python and WebAssembly.
So we don't compile Flutter, FlatFlutter part into WebAssembly yet because we have a lot of dependencies
and not all of them support Flutter, but it's definitely on our roadmap and whatever branch trying to produce Flutter build.
So it would be really nice because the size would be much smaller, the size of Flutter web would be much slower.
So it's probably, like right now it's 10 megabytes maybe, and it's going to be like 2 megabytes something.
So it's going to be really nice when we do that.
Yeah, that'd be great.
And with the right amount of caching, the right style of caching, you know, it's not that big of a deal, right?
Yeah, I know.
And yeah, PyDyne is a pretty strong project.
It has the biggest number of packages supported.
So it's great.
It's great.
Yeah.
You know, I believe that the Python core devs are also working on getting Python itself to be a sort of officially built for WebAssembly.
I know Brett Cannon's done a ton of work for this as well.
Does that help you guys in any way?
Absolutely.
Yeah.
It's actually right now we use this built-in Python support.
So we migrated from Kyivy to this approach.
And it's thanks to Beware guys, Russell and Malcolm.
So Russell is iOS, Malcolm is Android.
So they did a great, a really great job putting like this iOS and Android support into Python project itself.
And now they like actually they implemented this support for Python 3.13 in the backported to lower versions.
So how nice.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's like when I when I first when I first first saw the the proposal, you know, it's for iOS, first of all.
I really like it.
You know, it's really great.
I mean, like the way producing binary libraries, you know, like for and and packaging them.
It's really good because we can use dynamic libraries versus static libraries in Kyivy.
Like in Kyivy everything like like all these third party modules.
You can file your machine every time they produce static libraries.
Basically like dot A files for iOS.
Okay.
And and finally and they like the entire code base is like it's single executable at the end, you know, like everything like Numpy, like all this stuff is a single file.
I mean, and you cannot reuse some of those libraries, you know, like when when you package them into iOS app.
So yeah, when when I saw I really love the approach and I am the I understood, you know, that it's probably the way going forward, you know, and you see it's kind of like it's it's getting like a standard right now.
So yeah, I mean, I think it's a standard right now, but I think it's a standard right now.
So yeah, I think it's a standard right now.
Excellent.
And the, the NumPy folks, for example, as you said, they could use their expertise to get NumPy,
this NumPy C code and Python code to build for WebAssembly and just put that in as automation
and GitHub and everyone else in the world doesn't have to solve it over and over, right?
Yeah, I think it's, I mean, the Python 3.13 Python itself is, is, is pretty French, you know,
I think it's a, many packages are still on, like, don't support it, right?
So I believe like, in, in, at some point, those projects will start doing their, will start
producing their own iOS and Android wheels and publishing them to pypy once it's supported.
So yeah, and of course, they can reuse our expertise.
Yeah.
You're, you're making me dream, dream big, you know, like wheels for iOS and wheels for Android.
Could you, could you imagine a day where it's as easy to just get libraries for the mobile
platforms as it is for Mac or Linux or whatever?
Yeah, it's, it's still, you know, I can tell it's still, not many people working in this
area.
And, what I can tell you, it's, like modern processors, modern CPUs in Android and iOS,
uh, like Apple devices, they're pretty powerful, you know?
Uh, I remember there were a lot of like, those times, like Twitter, Twitter, Twitter,
2012, 2010, when, Kylie and, B-Ware started, there were a lot of issues trying
to squeeze this desktop C code into a mobile processor.
Yeah.
Now it's much easier.
Most of those packages could be compiled as is without any treats, without any,
features, you know?
Wow.
So, yeah.
So it's, it's pretty, it's pretty nice.
Maybe again, in the future we will have this, as a standard thing, you know?
Yeah.
Last pycon or the, maybe the Python before started, I think it was a Salt Lake.
Anyway, it doesn't really matter.
Recently, Carol Willing at the PyCon US keynote talked about how mobile is such an important
platform and, you know, there's people like you and Russell Keith McGee and the B-Ware team
working on it.
But I think it feels a little chicken and an egg to me, you know?
If, if it was a little easier, I think a bunch of, there would be a huge bunch of people that
jump into it, but there's, it's like, it takes projects like Flett and the B-Ware one to just
kind of unlock it.
And then I think once it gets unlocked, people are going to realize and just go for it, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's, it's, having, having Python on the mobile devices is, is pretty awesome.
You know, it's like for Android, for example, it's, it's, it adds maybe like eight megabytes
of size to your app.
So it's not so large.
You know, it makes sense.
Python is a great language.
It's, it's, it's great for, for beginners, you know, for scientists.
So it's, it's, it's really, I don't know, like addictive, you know, like to write the apps
for, for everything in Python.
I, I become like, I, I've been using Python for three years already and, I still love
it, you know?
Like I write most of my, like, even like, scripts, you know, like in Python, like,
so I, I'm looking back on.
Yeah.
I've worked in, yeah, I've worked in a lot of programming languages myself, static and dynamic
ones.
And yeah, it's Python is comfortable.
It's nice.
Yeah.
All right.
I want to talk about packaging and I know that's the area that you've been working on
a lot as well.
And as a segue, let's take a question from the audience.
Alan out there asks, I'm someone taking a careful look at Flett.
My question is, what is the process of getting a finished app reviewed by Apple or Google?
I think, let me rephrase that into slightly different part.
Part because the reviewed by Apple or Google, there's like a voodoo doll and you stick it
with a few pins and then you like rub it with an oil and then they, they approve your app,
right?
Like that seems to be the process.
It's been so hard.
But yeah, I think the thing is, how do you get it built in a way that you can submit it
to the app store?
And then it's just down to, right?
So what's the process?
So this is one of those rough questions, you know, it's, it's good.
And you should have a list of rough questions here.
You're ready to answer.
So right now we, you can build APK or AAB for Android.
You can sign it, but you have to upload the file manually right now into-
I see.
So you have to sideload it basically at the moment.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I mean, you produce, so flag build command allows you to build an AAB file, which is basically
APK for multiple platforms signing.
And then you upload it by yourself through the web interface of Google Play.
Oh, let me go back then.
Then that's not sideloading it.
That's just not having it auto upload.
Yeah.
But yeah.
Okay.
That that's, that's encouraging.
So for, for our, so we have our own flat app in both Google Play and App Store.
It's for testing apps on mobile devices.
It basically like the same flat client that connects to app through web circuits and the app itself
is running on your machine.
So yeah.
And honestly, right now we publish it with, with fast lane.
So there is a CI job that publishes both iOS and Android versions with fast lane.
Fast lane.
I'm not sure.
Maybe we will, we will, we'll do the instructions how to use fast lane because it's great too.
And it's, it's pretty easy to synchronize certificates, you know, for app store and publish your app and
make that information for app.
So yeah.
But right now you can, you can build IPA, you can build AAB, but you have to upload them manually.
I think that's fine.
Yeah.
And then the review process starts, but that's the voodoo doll part where you get the voodoo doll
out and you hit it with the, the, the needles.
Yeah.
But, but I can tell you people, people usually concerned about like, is it, whether is it allowed
to have Python or like the, like stuff like that in your app.
And would it be approved by Apple, by Google?
And I can tell you, it works pretty well.
We dock food our own stuff.
So we build clip app using clap.
So, the way it's packaged inside, it's getting approved.
Um, there are some issues.
I can tell you, there are some issues.
Uh, for example, disable, we, we, we use to disable, X, X 86 devices right away.
And, because, they're like Google play, mutual machines, they show just like a black screen,
you know, like, and, like the market share for, for those devices pretty small right now.
So we disabled that.
So it took us the review, but it works, it works.
Nice.
Awesome.
Okay.
I want to talk through the, the publishing workflow that you all have with the new CLI tools you got,
but let's just dive into one more thing real quick.
So when I have my Python code running, let's just say iOS, I have my Python code running on an iPhone.
How, what is the runtime look like?
Is that regular CPython?
Can I add a, a standard package as a wheel?
Like, could I use HTTP X?
Like, what is the story around the execution environment and the external packages and so on?
So, well, yeah, it's, it's CPython.
And, as I said, right now we use, or this serious Python package, it uses, Python that, that is, built by those scripts, which are part of, Python 3.13.
Mm-hmm.
So, like, theoretically, if you, if you go there to Python repository and look into those,
folders, you will see instructions, you can, you can follow those instructions and build runtime, like build CPython for both iOS and Android.
But yes, this is, it's not BASM, it's, CPython compiled into, native iOS or Android code, like, for, for platform, not like code, assemble.
And, binary packages, yes, you have to, repackage, you have to build binary packages targeting those platforms as well.
And for that purposes, we use, model for project by beware.
Uh, it's pretty nice.
It's, it's, it's an awesome project.
It's a, it's a brainchild of, Malcolm and Russell.
And, yeah.
And, so it uses, in its, in its turn, it uses cross and package, which is basically, the way to simulate, like it, like it allows you to create virtual environment, in Python things that it's being run on a mobile device, you know?
So it's like, basically model forge is, is, is like, you, you do, people install something.
And, it feels like for Python, it feels like it's being run this command on, on a mobile device.
And you, it uses, like if it's binary package and there is setup.py or by project.toml.
It uses, mobile compilers, cross compilers to build, dot.so file.
And for you.
I see.
So if a pip install action requires a local build of something, it will use the mobile compilers with the target platform being like iPhone or whatever.
Right.
So it's like the, the, the whole, the whole page is like this cross and it tweaks Python into thinking.
It's kind of like running on, on the mobile device, you know, like, and it has these compilers, this archiver, this linker, you know, et cetera.
So like, and it, it's, it's, it's pretty, it's pretty smart, thing, you know, like in most cases, so you should do a recipe, but this time recipe is, is basically a YAML file.
It's, you know, like meta.yaml.
And in most cases, if it's standard C, if it's simple package, you don't have to do anything.
It works right away.
You can build it for Android.
You can build it for iOS.
It takes literally minutes to produce a binary wheel for both platforms.
Wow.
Okay.
That's fantastic.
Yeah.
That's really cool.
I'll definitely link that in the show notes.
to wherever I put it, the publishing side of things.
So maybe we could talk through a little bit about the, the CLI and the process.
Maybe.
Yeah.
Tell us, tell us how we go through this to get something built here.
So the first, the first release, the first releases of web, way using, the like so-called web, like offering flat path command and using the,
Py installer to produce executable, but it works for desktop platforms as well only.
And to produce the package on the bundle for the mobile platform, you need to do more.
It's still possible, as those guys are basically z-trials inside.
You can build the AAB, you can build the APK, you can build IPA by yourself or using Xcode tools.
And it's like it's the approach B-Ware takes, for example.
So the briefcase, it builds like packages basically from scratch, you know.
But for Flutter, we use, we require to use Flutter SDK.
So there is a new command, like build, which uses Flutter SDK.
And it's basically like a wrapper around the Flutter build command, which allows you to build
the app for desktop, for web, for mobile.
So inside, we take template.
We take template and we create a new Flutter app and we build this Flutter app.
Right.
And just for people listening, the template looks something like, here's a folder with a
images and here's a main.py and a pyproject.toml, stuff that Python people would be familiar with.
Yeah.
So this is template for the app and the template for Flutter app.
It's something internal.
You don't have to look into that, you know.
It's like...
Yeah.
It gets kind of complicated for the different platforms and linking them together and stuff.
So, you know, the problem with Flutter is like the difference because we want to support extensions.
We want to allow people using those nice extensions packages on .def.
So we cannot have the same process every time.
We should really run a Flutter build to, like for example, include a media kit for video control
or audio players package for audio control.
So it's not the same.
It's always...
So it should be built from Dart to this, you know, code Flutter produces.
Yeah.
That's a lot of what Flutter is.
It's like orchestrating all the pieces to build into the right stuff to go into the mobile apps.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Okay.
So we've got this pyproject.toml.
And you even have a create CLI command like Flutter create my app or whatever.
Yeah.
And it will go and get that all out there, right?
So really nice.
Yeah.
It's all recent stuff and it's still pretty rough, but it's great.
And here you have Flutter build and then target platform.
And where target platform is APK, that is Android, AAB IPA, which is iOS, web, macOS, Windows,
and Linux.
That's a pretty impressive list of package destinations for building in an executable.
So if I build...
Let's suppose this.
If I build a...
Let's say Windows.
If I say target equals Windows, what files or file or executable or what do I get when
I run that?
Do I get just a .exe?
Do I get a .exe with DLLs or a whole bunch of other stuff?
Yeah.
Unfortunately, it's not a single .exe, but it's exe and a bunch of DLLs.
Yes, it's...
If you look inside the folder, you'll see like this executable then Python itself, Python
runtime, which is a bunch of lead files, you know, and DLLs, Python files themselves.
Then your app coming as a zip file.
And also different kind of DLLs from plugins, from extension packages, platter packages.
Like for video, for example, it's going to be like four more DLLs, something.
Sure.
So yeah, it's a bunch of things.
Yeah, but...
Yeah.
But it's something I could put into an installer or copy to a Windows machine and then create
a shortcut to the .exe and it looks like an app to the user.
Yeah.
You can make self-extracting archive or MSI.
Yeah, exactly.
Okay.
And for macOS?
For macOS, it's a bundle.
Is that a .app bundle?
Yeah, .app, yeah.
But it's a standard bundle that looks like a file, but it's a folder, you know?
So works like a charm, you know, like having the right structure.
Again, the app inside is part of Flutter asset, which is like, it's called like car file.
It's not even a zip, it's called the file.
Yeah, it's a standard bundle.
It's a bundle.
It's a .app bundle.
Yeah.
But it's a standard bundle that looks like a file, but it's a folder, you know?
So works like a charm, you know, like having the right structure.
Again, the app inside is part of Flutter asset, which is like, it's called like car file.
It's not like even a zip, it's car file, and which has all the assets.
Nice.
But again, it's a work in progress, you know?
Yeah.
All right, are you ready for the hard question now?
Those are awesome answers.
But here's the one that has been driving me crazy, is so many of these platforms, by that
way, that I mean, Windows and Mac have anti-malware, anti-phishing protections, which is good.
But that means if you build a .app file and just try to run it, it'll say, this is from an
untrusted developer.
We'll probably, you want to move it to the trash?
You know what I mean?
Like, the lack of notarization, or on Windows, if it's not digitally signed with a trusted
certificate, it gets treated with like a yellow warning.
Is there a way to digitally sign these, or notarize them through Apple?
So, yeah, it's...
I know Flutter can do it.
So maybe you could shell, maybe it shells down to the Flutter side of how that works.
Flutter can do it, but still, it looks pretty complicated, you know?
Oh, yeah.
Even from my perspective, like, it looks pretty creepy.
But I have this item on my desk right now, to start from micro-IS, because there was a complaint
from one user recently, like two days ago, and I still had this issue.
a lot of people, like, I'm going to do whatever you like.
Like, no, I'm going to go through all the slabs, because right now, honestly, we don't even use
sandbox mode in produced .app file, you know?
So we start from there, and there was an issue with loading Python binaries, like package binaries.
I'm going to solve that problem as well.
So, yeah, definitely, it's our next step.
Yeah, we, as you see, we're getting closer and closer to building real apps, and we're getting more
developers building real apps, and they want to publish them.
It's not just experimental, you know, anymore.
Like, they want to publish them, and we are working on that right now, like publishing.
Awesome.
Yeah, that's awesome.
And it's actually, it's our number one priority for the next year, you know?
Yeah.
I'll tell you, if you had that dialed, I mean, that means, that opens up desktop apps completely.
Right?
Yeah, absolutely.
So, we will, I will start from macOS, because I have probably more, a little bit more experience
with my class right now.
And then I want to continue with the Windows Store.
I never, I never published anything to Windows Store before.
So, it's going to be an interesting journey, you know, but, yeah, Windows Store as well.
Well, yeah, even if you just digitally signed it, so that if you downloaded off someone else's
website, it wouldn't go, oh my gosh, this is an executable that's untrusted, run away, you know?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's right.
I, I, we actually, sign our MSIs right now, for, for other products.
And, it's kind of like conspiracy, you know?
Like, so you have to use a really expensive certificate to pass through, what was it like,
screen, Windows screen, something like, so it's not just even like code signing and not even easy
code signing.
No, it's, it's something else.
Yeah.
On macOS, it's Gatekeeper and these sorts of things.
I remember it's like, $600 per year, something like that, at least.
If you want to pass, this Windows 11 screen, yeah.
Yeah.
Otherwise it's always a warning.
Always.
Yeah.
Where's the, where's the let's encrypt for desktop apps?
Come on, people, somebody help us out.
Where's the cert bot for let's for, for desktop apps.
But yeah, I, you know, like it's, it's there for a reason because people kept getting wrecked
by ransomware and all sorts of stuff, but it does make building desktop apps challenging.
Well, yeah, but we'll get there.
No worries.
Yeah.
I love it.
All right.
What else should we say about, about this here?
Um, I guess controls.
I know there was a question.
I see a video.
There was a question out in the audience also from Alan's is about camera controls.
Is this a thing that you guys support yet?
Sure.
We, we started working on that, but it's, it's not like it was kind of like, testing the
waters, you know, like, it's kind of like we, we, at this moment we are trying to harmonize
API, flat API, flat API.
And, as I see it right now, we, we're going to split all controls into like visual controls
and, and so-called services.
So camera is going to be service because yeah, right now it's, sometimes it's, it's kind of messy, you know, like, to use non-visual controls.
You have to add them like to overlay or something.
And, like if you jump to a different page, like audio could stop, you know, like, so we, we're going to re-implement that.
And, camera is true.
Camera is, is number one parameter right now.
That's why there is a, there is a draft pull request and, we're not closing it.
So we, we keep it, we keep it in mind all the time.
Okay.
The reason I even brought that up right now is because part of this packaging process, you have to state things like your, permissions that you're requesting, like access to location.
And you also have to include which, optional controls you want to build like audio recorder or geolocation or maps and things like that.
Right.
Yep.
And, this is, something we're gonna, we're gonna change by the next release as well.
So we, we will make this process more streamlined easier to, to add new controls, or services and, include them into build process.
Got it.
Yeah.
Well, even having them under, a subsection of your pipe project.tomal is pretty nice actually.
So it's, it's looks, it looks standard, you know?
Yeah.
It looks like it belongs, which is really nice.
Right.
And obviously you've got icons and splash screens and all of those types of things that you have to include in order to build, especially mobile apps.
So it even an icon for a dot app or a dot exe.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
I guess one more thing.
We got time for it.
One more thing to call out here about this packaging and side of things, or maybe, maybe two, but this one's pretty interesting is by default,
flat will flat build, will just pile your Python app together and assume that it must be fine, but you have a --compile app option that will compile your Python files.
Now people listening might think, well, but there's no Python compiler.
There is a Python compiler.
You just don't do anything with it.
It's in the interpreter, right?
So when Python loads your Python files, it converts it to a bytecode and then interprets it, right?
But you can have it compile that to PYC files, which will detect problems, right?
That's kind of cool.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
So, yeah, tell people about that a bit.
One of the reasons we introduced those options is that if you always compile and there are some issues inside user code, the entire process fails, you know?
Like, I mean, like, even at least one single syntax error somewhere in your app leads to, like, a failed build process.
So we introduced those options.
And also, you can disable compilation.
So it could be easy to, you know, debug your app.
Yeah.
But again, it's people asking, like, is it, like, can I see what's going on?
Like, if I'm, like, downloaded your app and looked inside, like, can I see what's going on inside my app?
Like, can users see?
Well, it's not the, the way to proper protect your app from someone, like, from looking into the logic, you know?
It's, it's not 100% protection.
So maybe you should use obfuscators.
And we'll have some ideas to build obfuscating.
Oh, really?
I was gonna, I was thinking obfuscators were kind of like a separate thing that you just, you're considering.
Okay.
It's, it's, it's, it's, it's, uncharted.
I mean, like, it's, yeah, imagine if, if it doesn't work.
I mean, it's good if it works.
Like if, if you obfuscate it and it works, but, Python is pretty complex thing because, it's, it operates, by text files, you know?
Like, so you can break some paths and, you know, like, like module names, you know, like, and, whatnot.
I'm not sure.
Like, if it's even like,
Yeah, exactly.
If it obfuscates the import statement or it said import requests, like that's not gonna work anymore.
Yeah.
Cause that's how Python works.
You need to see it.
Yeah.
If I compile my Python files, my py files, does that omit them from the project and only include the pyc files or how does that work?
Sure.
Yeah, sure.
Uh, we, we remove .py.
Okay.
That's already pretty, pretty good levels of obfuscation.
There are disassemblers and decompilers for C code for, especially for .net and Java, you can get those back to almost source level decompilation.
Yeah.
And sort of thing.
So yeah, that's, that's kind of close to, at least close to, I would say it puts it on par with .net level of obfuscation.
Yeah.
All right.
The last thing I guess, we should talk about real quick is just permission.
So if you live in this mobile world, this is Android manifest.xml or info.plist or .entitemence and all these things.
And so you support these platform specific deals pretty much because flutter supports them, right?
Mm-hmm.
So it's, it's, it's, it's not like pre-canned permissions.
The, the, you, you can put anything you like.
It's, basically it's whatever you put here, into PyProject.tomal or, common line arguments, it goes, you know, directly to this, flat build, template.
So it's, it's, in fact, it's, the template is a cookie cutter template.
And, there are a bunch of, for each statements, you know, like, going through all these arrays.
So whatever you put here, it goes to those entitlements, peelings and, manifest file.
Nice.
So it's pretty, it's pretty flexible.
Yeah.
But sure.
We have like some pre, predefined.
Cool.
So when you say it's a cookie cutter thing, it's not just like a template.
It literally uses the Python cookie cutter library, right?
Mm-hmm.
Yep.
So it's, the template, it, it, it, it's, it's in a separate, repository.
So every command, the loss that, template and, provides the data, combines template and data.
And,
Yeah.
And, produces this, Flutter app and then it goes to Flutter build.
Cool.
It looks great.
And it looks great.
And it also looks like a lot of work.
So congratulations on making it as far.
Yeah.
Thank you.
It's so a lot of work.
Yeah.
Let's see.
I wanted to just have you real quickly close out.
I don't know where I stuck it somewhere in here.
Uh, the roadmap for, for where you're going.
So maybe tell us.
So, yeah.
What's in the future?
What's, what's in the near term that people can count on?
And then we'll wrap up our show.
Yeah.
Sure.
We, yeah.
Maybe this roadmap is already, outdated, but yeah.
First of all, we want to, we want to have this one, 1.0 because it's, maybe it's a psychological thing.
You know, it's, like people, developers feel stability.
You know, when there is 1.0, it's, it says that the framework is ready for, for serious apps.
I mean, like, I mean,
Yeah.
It's a commitment to, to sustainability.
Like we think we're ready.
Yeah.
Right.
And it's committed commitment for sustainability and it's commitment for proper release schedule.
So we'll keep this release after releasing it and we'll be providing patches to this 1.0, et cetera, et cetera.
So you can, you can start doing real apps using 1.0.
So it's 1.0 and we, we, we are, we're doing a lot of work trying to harmonize API, trying to remove outdated stuff, trying to, like, have,
consistent naming conventions across different controls you know it's like
property names method names remove different duplicates so it's a lot of
work and almost there so definitely like another thing is improving
developer experience right so improving developer experience part of improving
developer experience like for example we will be pre-installing all
dependencies to make flat build command work work really smooth in your
computer like right now we have to install flutter by cell but we'll be
installing correct version of flutter on your behalf and that's cool yeah Java
could be a plan real thing like sending his Java phone
your fear of people who have not been through flutter projects they don't know
they don't know all the little tools and the the version mismatches and I've got this
version of Android Studio but the Android SDK version wasn't checked correctly and so now
I can't you know like that what you're saying is there's a lot of stuff that you could help
out with and make that smoother but it's challenging yeah yeah and still it's still
you need Android Studio yeah you can spend a lot of time configuring those things you know what maybe next year we're gonna we're gonna work start working on on the service like I call it packaging and publishing service okay so so you could somehow link a GitHub branch like a production branch or something if you push that you can do it.
- We can spend a lot of time configuring those things.
You know what, maybe next year we're gonna start working
on the service like, I call it a packaging
and publishing service.
- Okay, so.
- So you could somehow link a GitHub branch,
like a production branch or something.
If you push to that, you guys grab it
and you'll build all the assets.
- Absolutely, yeah.
- Nice, okay.
- So you can push your just, you know,
your coding this directly to this service
and get artifact back, you know,
like a MSI file or APP file.
- That'd be awesome actually.
Yeah, that's very cool.
- Yeah, and you don't need to deal with all these dependencies,
like all this stuff, you know, it's,
you just do your part, your like Python code and that's it.
- And the rest will be done inside the, yeah, in the cloud.
So that's the idea, that's the plan.
- Very promising.
I love it.
And I love all this work, all this progress you guys have made.
So thanks for coming back on and sharing with everyone.
Let's close it out.
Final call to action.
People are interested in Flet.
What do you tell them?
- So go ahead, download the latest version.
Try doing your app and join our Discord channel.
So, and let us know what you think.
Yeah.
- Awesome.
All right.
Thanks a bunch.
See you later.
- Yeah.
Thank you guys.
Bye.
- Yeah.
Thank you guys.
Bye.